Welcome to the marketplace of ideas.
Here, ideas of every description
are attacked from every angle
to test how well they stand up to rigorous scrutiny.
The marketplace is necessarily brutal
because its business is arguably
the most important business of humankind.
The business of determining reality
—or the most reliable approximations
to reality that we can muster.
In order to do that, the marketplace needs
to identify and eradicate false ideas
grounded in deception,  ignorance or error.
In this gladiatorial arena, it pays not to
take too much for granted.
Sometimes ideas that’ve enjoyed
the favour of the crowds for centuries
can be suddenly cut down by a new contender
just as the geocentric view of the universe
— in which the sun orbited the Earth —
was vanquished by the heliocentric view.
There can be no room for favouritism.
Because bad ideas breed.
Say we take the harmless act of singing.
We claim the human voice wasn’t meant to sing.
It was meant to talk and call and shout.
We propose that ‘singing is a decadent,
immoral perversion’.
If we accept this idea without challenge or scrutiny,
where might it take us?
Well, first, it might simply discourage
individuals from singing.
But then it might enable another idea:
that ‘hearing other people sing corrupts our morals’.
After all, hearing others sing
might make some folks think it’s ok.
This might enable the idea
that we should stop other people singing
—which in turn might enable further ideas
about how to do that.
Maybe ‘gag them’. Maybe ‘imprison them’. Maybe ‘kill them’.
Left unchecked, bad ideas can take us down
very destructive paths.
That’s why ideas need to be attacked forcefully,
and ideally at their root.
If the root idea is eliminated,
its offshoots have nothing to draw on.
It's not a blood sport. It’s a truth sport.
If flawed are detected,
ideas can be eliminated or refined
so that what’s left standing should represent
progressively closer approximations to reality.
But some ideas are left standing for other reasons.
Some ideas have enjoyed the special
privilege of immunity from criticism.
For centuries, religions have relied on extreme
fear tactics to crush all challenge.
Folks proposing unorthodox changes to their religion
— often to try and reform serious abuses
— have been labelled ‘heretics’.
Folks declining to respect the particular taboos of a religion
— whether or not they’re members of that religion —
have been labelled ‘blasphemers’.
And on charges of heresy and blasphemy,
countless humans down the centuries have been
shunned, imprisoned, censored and killed.
But many folks have grown sick of being intimidated
into silence
about the dehumanising prejudices and violations
embedded in these protected religions.
And, in many parts of the world
threats of punishment for blasphemy
have lost their power.
But in recent years, a new tactic
has emerged to try and shut critics down,
attempting to conflate the crucial business of attacking
ideas with the reprehensible attacking of people.
Instead of ‘blasphemers’, critics of religious ideologies
have been collectively labelled
‘prejudiced’, ‘racist’, even ‘phobic’
insinuating that their objections
necessarily stem from irrational fear
rather than a sober consideration of the evidence.
And it’s been interesting to see how this tactical shift
has been received in the marketplace of ideas.
The marketplace has long championed ideas like
‘prejudice is unfair’ and ‘racism is unjust’.
And, on that basis
for a while it seemed the marketplace
was hoodwinked by these recent imposters
— these false definitions of prejudice and racism.
But, like the religious ideologies
they’re designed to protect
these fake accusations themselves are now
coming under the scrutiny of the marketplace.
And they’re swiftly losing their punch.
Watching this new wave of religion-defending play out in the marketplace of ideas
has a personal resonance for me.
Years ago, I went through a similar period
of religion-defending in my own marketplace.
We each possess our own exclusive
marketplace — called a mind —
where we privately assess the ideas that
come our way.
Compared to the public marketplace
which can draw on the vast experience and skills
of many minds to attack ideas with maximum rigour
the internal marketplace is
a distinctly inferior environment.
without other minds to compensate for our biasses,
our ignorance and other personal weaknesses,
the end-products of our internal marketplace
are much more vulnerable to distortion.
And it’s because of distorting factors like these that,
for many years, I defended a religion called Islam.
In the spirit of transparency, I want to share some of the
key events that shaped and reshaped my attitudes,
including a childhood incident that coloured my outlook
a descent into fierce dissonance
and some experiences with a handful
of wonderful Muslims and ex-Muslims
who helped me dismantle my defenses
and look again at what I’d been defending.
One day, at the age of eight, I was out
roller-skating with my best friend
a boy from a Turkish family who I’ll call Bora.
We’d been skating round the local streets
when a wheel came loose on one of Bora’s boots.
By chance, we were near my grandparents’ house,
so I called on my grandfather to help fix it.
While he looked at the roller skate,
my grandmother took me to one side.
In a tone of concern, she asked,
‘Your friend isn’t a Muslim is he?’
I’d heard Bora use that word.
But my Christian indoctrination only exposed me
to the Biblical religions: Christianity and Judaism.
I’d heard about Buddhism, but only from watching
a dubbed Japanese TV show called ‘Monkey’
in which a monkey king, along with a pig-monster
called Pigsy, and a swamp monster called Sandy
accompany a Buddhist monk Tripitaka
on a pilgrimage to India.
But Islam was nowhere on my radar.
Bora was always teasing me in Turkish
so I’d assumed ‘Muslim’ was another Turkish word
— and I was baffled to hear my grandmother using it.
I asked her, ‘How did you know?’
In response, she looked terrified
and gripped my arm hard
telling me, ‘Whatever you do, don’t tell your grandfather!’
She said a Muslim killed his brother.
And if he found out my friend was a Muslim,
he might take his revenge.
It was one of those hallucinatory moments
where the world stops making sense.
I looked back at Bora joking around with my grandfather, unaware of any threat.
It was nightmarish.
My grandfather seemed to take ages
to repair the roller skate.
Every second I feared my
grandmother’s question would occur to him.
The moment the skate was fixed, I flustered a quick thanks and got Bora to race me down the road.
After a few blocks, my panic subsided,
but my disorientation remained.
Punishing the innocent for other people’s wrongdoings
was common practice in the Bible.
Children were cursed because
of their parents’ transgressions.
Humankind was cursed because the first two humans disobeyed the Christian god Yahweh.
From the very start, this misdirected punishment
had never made any sense to me.
But it seemed even more irrational in real life.
What could my grandfather achieve by attacking Bora? He might as well attack a tree.
I didn’t know the word ‘prejudice’ yet. But I knew
what I’d just encountered felt ugly and alien.
When we eventually stopped for a rest,
Bora said what a nice man my grandfather was.
I said nothing.
I was desperate to know what ‘Muslim’ meant.
But I was afraid to ask anyone.
Still thinking it was Turkish,
I didn’t bother with dictionaries.
And this was years before the internet.
Months later, when Bora spoke the word again,
I saw my chance and asked him about it.
And discovered there was another religion in the world.
I became very protective of Bora,
and, by extension, other Muslims.
At age 11, I moved to secondary school
and finally got some religious education.
Aside from teaching us about its rituals and festivals
our teacher taught us that
Islam was the religion of peace
and that its holy book, the Qur’an,
promoted support for science.
This ticked some great boxes. I imagined
a religion full of friendly intellectuals.
But, in 1989, that image was shaken by news
reports of an Iranian Muslim leader called Khomeini
declaring a death sentence on author
Salman Rushdie for an allegedly blasphemous novel
called ‘The Satanic Verses’.
At first I dismissed it as a joke.
Muslims wouldn’t act like this.
When I found out Khomeini’s decree was genuine
I was stuck for an explanation.
It was so medievally barbaric.
I concluded Khomeini wasn’t a real Muslim
— just a demagogue, trying to exploit Muslims
for his own political gains.
The news was awash with
British Muslims burning the book,
and swearing to kill Rushdie.
I concluded these would-be assassins
couldn’t be genuine Muslims either.
And I hoped Islam would  soon
loudly re-assert its true nature.
As I started university
the Rushdie affair had died down and I’d lulled myself
into believing peace was restored
Jameena and I arrived early
on enrollment day and got talking.
I was impressed to discover
she’d already been credited in a published paper
on the evolution of the human hand.
As I got to know her, I found her to be
a witty, open and warm individual.
When she heard I liked to cook, she plied me
with an endless stream of amazing recipes.
One day, after finally reading her evolution paper
I mentioned the anti-evolution sentiment
I’d experienced in Christianity
and I complimented Islam’s commitment to science.
With a candour that must’ve come easy
in the face of my idealism
Jameena gingerly corrected
some of my misconceptions.
There was no core commitment to science in Islam.
In fact, there was extreme resistance to any science
that conflicted with Islamic teaching.
Regarding evolution, she said
Muslims held a range of views.
Some considered it blasphemous.
Others had no problem with it as long as humans were excluded.
Others endorsed divinely guided evolution.
But she knew very few Muslims who
shared her acceptance of natural human evolution.
Even within her own family, she’d had to
limit who she told about her evolution paper.
It was a great disappointment to hear all the same
resistances I’d heard in my old Christian community.
I started to pay closer attention
to actual Muslim attitudes to science
and realised my religious education teacher’s mistake.
The claim wasn’t that the Qur’an was a supporter
of science, but that it was supported by science
— ie that the ideas in this 1400-year-old book
were substantiated by modern scientific findings.
Among the examples I heard was a claim that science
showed that mountains keep the land in place
supporting Qur’an passages in which Allah set down mountains like pegs to stop the land shaking.
Of course, what science actually showed
was that far from being pre-existing
pegs that stop land movement
mountains were the product of ongoing land movement
formed by the collision of the
Earth’s slowly moving plates.
Earthquakes— literally ‘land shakes‘ —
were an even more obvious falsification of the claim.
Unscientific holy books were nothing new to me.
I’d long been aware of similar flaws in the Bible.
For instance, Yahweh’s depicted
creating plants before creating the sun.
So lifeforms that relied on photosynthesis
had no photo to synthesise.
But it was Jameena’s comment about
Muslim attitudes towards evolution
that stayed with me
and raised some unsettling thoughts.
Not always, but sometimes
a rejection of evolution was associated with bogus ideas
about what humans are ‘designed’ for.
I’d experienced aggressive outbursts about
evolution from some Church of England Christians
and Jehovah’s Witnesses — and it was no
coincidence that these same folks
had extremely fixed views on issues
like gender and sexuality.
They believed their god Yahweh
‘designed’ women as subordinates to men
and ‘designed’ humans to be exclusively heterosexual.
I realised if Islam promoted these kinds of fixed gender
and sexual roles, that could spell big trouble.
The Qur’an was claimed to be the perfect word of a god,
conveyed verbatim by an angel.
Much harder to face the possibility of human error
if you believe your scripture’s dictated
by a god instead of merely inspired by one.
But, just as it did with the Rushdie affair,
the phrase ‘religion of peace’ eased my concerns.
Within weeks of meeting Jameena, I met Parinda.
We enrolled as volunteers at the same charity
and quickly became pals.
One day, the subject of partners came up,
and Parinda revealed she was divorcing her husband.
She said it was an extremely complicated
business. I asked why she was divorcing him.
After a long pause, she said, ‘Domestic abuse.’
Then it was like watching a dam burst.
The whole story gushed out of her.
For years, he’d beaten her
— always careful to target parts of her that
couldn’t be seen and never leave permanent marks.
When she’d told her parents, they’d sided with him
suspecting her of being a rebellious wife.
In desperation, she’d thrown herself down some concrete stairs, breaking several bones.
She hadn’t cared whether she’d be hospitalised or die.
She just didn’t want to spend every moment in fear.
It was only when they saw her in hospital that
her parents’ finally changed their attitude
and supported her divorce.
I couldn’t imagine defending someone who
beat my child. Parinda said it wasn’t their fault.
It was what their religion taught them.
She said Islam instructed husbands
to beat rebellious wives.
It even warned women that the angels cursed wives
who refused their husbands’ sexual demands.
I didn’t believe Islam would promote
such dehumanising values.
Privately, I figured Parinda
was taking scripture out of context.
But the abuse and lack of support she’d suffered
was horrifying, and I was relieved it was over.
A couple of weeks later, Parinda arrived
in a clearly agitated state.
We went outside for a private chat
and I asked what was up.
She said her brother’s son had come out to her as gay.
It was unlike her to have an issue with sexuality.
I asked what the problem was.
She said she was afraid for him.
I said I was sure he’d be ok —
folks were more enlightened these days.
She said I didn’t understand.
If her brother found out, he’d take
his son back to India and bury him alive.
I had to check I hadn’t misheard. She confirmed I hadn’t.
Even as an empty threat,
the idea was unthinkably wicked.
But Parinda clearly took it seriously.
I said Islam must condemn such violence.
She said Islam was the source
of these murderous ideas.
In a conspiratorial whisper,
she told me Islam wasn’t what I thought it was.
She said the Muslims in her community
wanted outsiders to think
they embraced values like freedom and equality.
But they really didn’t.
So, fixed gender and sexual roles —both of which I’d
predicted would be especially disastrous within Islam —
—had now been presented as part of Islamic doctrine.
I could’ve responded to this information by
picking up a Qur’an, or investigating the Hadith
— the multi-authored reports of the life of Muhammad
written and collected years after his death.
But I simply didn’t feel the need.
A religion of peace would
never sanction wife-beating and murder.
I figured Parinda was making up
stories to try to excuse her parents’ betrayal
and her brother’s pathological homophobia.
It was understandable. They were family.
Of course, she’d want to pretend they weren’t
responsible for their hateful ideas.
But I couldn’t support her delusions.
And in the following weeks,
whenever she criticised Islam, I stayed silent.
She soon got the message
and dropped the subject.
On her final day, I barely recognised the
woman who walked in.
No hijab. Just an elegant trouser suit.
I said, ‘You look different.’
She said she’d realised criticising her community
in secret achieved nothing.
She wanted to align herself visibly
with the values of freedom and equality she held dear.
Disapproving comments had already been conveyed
to her parents in the last week
from folks who’d seen her on the street.
But she didn’t mind.
She said it might spark some useful discussion.
After she’d said her goodbyes to everyone else,
I went outside with her.
She said she loved my faith in people
—and she hoped they didn’t disappoint me.
She gave me a tearful hug and drove away.
I met Oz on a one-day workshop in existential therapy.
The day began with an ice-breaking exercise
in which we stood in a circle
and someone would step into the centre and share
a personal characteristic that wasn’t visibly obvious.
Everyone who shared that characteristic
would join the person in the centre.
Then we’d resume our positions
and someone else would have a go.
In one of my turns, I stepped in
and said, ‘I’m an atheist’.
Among the folks who joined me in the centre was Oz.
When he returned to the wider circle,
he had an irrepressible grin.
Over the morning, we paired up as exercise partners.
And when lunch time came, I invited him to a local cafe
where we had a spell-breaking conversation.
He told me that was his first confession
of atheism and he was still buzzing.
I asked him about his path out of Islam.
He asked if I’d heard of ‘The Satanic Verses’.
He’d been a teenager during the Rushdie
incident.
He’d seen his fellow Muslims’
anger and resentment about the book.
They’d approached the publishers
—even the police — to stop its circulation.
But no action was taken. So they took to the streets.
Oz said the London demonstrations were exhilarating.
And afterwards there was a sense of relief and vindication when the protests dominated the news
sending the message: ‘We exist!’
But his mood changed when he saw
the concerned reactions of non-Muslims.
People spoke of living among
a religion full of mindless assassins.
Neighbours they’d befriended were backing off.
Even his classmates were asking
if he wanted to kill Rushdie.
Publicly, he denounced these reactions as
ignorant and prejudiced.
But privately, he knew he and his family
had felt great pride
when news reports showed British Muslims
vowing to kill Rushdie.
He realised he couldn’t have it both ways
—wanting Rushdie dead
but crying ‘prejudice’ when correctly
suspected of wanting Rushdie dead.
To sort out his position, he did what neither Khomeini
or anyone in Oz’s community had done.
He read the book.
He obtained a copy which he read in secret.
But instead of gratuitous scandal, he found
a witty, insightful novel
that magically voiced many of his own feelings
about identity and belonging
— and underscored the need
to question what we’re told.
Oz realised he’d been deceived about Rushdie
— and that he and his fellow Muslims had
allowed themselves to be whipped up by their leaders
into a completely false sense of victimhood.
He made subtle hints to his family
about reading the book
but soon realised they were impervious
to reason or evidence.
Vowing he’d never be like that, he began
questioning his own firmly held beliefs.
Before long, he was an atheist,
exploring humanist ideas.
Oz’s story aroused a deep anxiety in me.
As we headed back to the existential therapy workshop
I asked him if he thought
he’d ever come out to his family.
He said his parents’ country executed people
for leaving Islam — and they supported that penalty.
He wryly noted the double-standard of Muslims who
demanded acknowledgement for their own existence
while privately wishing to end the existence of others.
For me, this was the tipping point.
The tutor began the afternoon session
with a talk about the loss of meaning
which was exactly what I was experiencing.
It was a familiar hallucinatory feeling.
A feeling that the world suddenly made no sense.
Out of nowhere, the roller-skate incident
with Bora bubbled up in my mind.
I hadn’t thought of it for years.
I remembered my eight-year-old self, rooted
to the spot, terrified for my best friend.
And I realised that in my eagerness to defend
him, I’d given Islam a completely free pass.
Defending an innocent friend
from a perceived threat made sense.
Defending an ideology I’d never scrutinised was absurd.
The free pass was revoked.
Recalling the roller-skate incident with a
clear head led me to revoke something else.
I realised that, till the day he died, I’d never once heard
my grandfather express any anti-Muslim feeling.
I’d found him guilty of murderous prejudice
based purely on my grandmother’s fears.
I now corrected that verdict to ‘not guilty’.
When the workshop ended, I thanked Oz
for sharing his story with me.
From that day, over ten years ago,I began to unravel
the mess I’d got myself into over Islam.
That process of unravelling
underscored a number of ideas.
Idea one: distorted ideas backfire.
When we set out to defend something —whether it’s
a group of people, an ideology or a principle —
— it’s crucial to have an accurate
understanding of that thing
or we could end up actively
opposing the very thing we think we’re fighting for.
In striving for a distorted idea of freedom
— one that only grants freedom to those
we agree with —
we could end up opposing freedom, becoming
authoritarian, controlling, even totalistic.
In striving for a distorted idea of equality
— one that denies natural variations
in preferences between groups —
we could end up advocating gross inequalities.
In striving to support Muslims,
I ended up denying support to Parinda
because of my distorted idea of Muslims.
The roller-skate incident and
my one-sided religious education
led me to define Muslims in a very narrow way:
as peaceful and vulnerable.
To some folks, that might sound
like a positive image to have of Muslims
—one that should inspire protectiveness towards them.
But it inspired denial.
Khomeini was violent and oppressive.
But because that contradicted my idea of Muslims,
I denied that he or his followers were real Muslims.
When Jameena revealed Muslims
had no intrinsic commitment to science,
I was able to accept that.
Disappointing as it was, it didn’t contradict the peaceful, vulnerable image.
But when Parinda linked the oppressive values
of her husband and family to Islam, my denial returned.
These values had to be down to personal flaws
that had nothing to do with Islam.
This meant Parinda was not credible.
So, paradoxically, viewing Muslims as peaceful
and vulnerable
was what caused me to disbelieve
a peaceful, vulnerable Muslim.
Ironically, if I’d taken the opposite distorted view
—defining Muslims as oppressive and violent —
I could’ve accepted Parinda’s story.
I say ironically because I wouldn’t’ve got to hear it.
Viewing her as an oppressive Muslim too,
I wouldn’t’ve befriended her.
So Parinda loses either way.
These are the ironies and paradoxes that can arise when
we define any broad group in a distorted way.
Viewing people as exclusively virtuous or
exclusively wicked is called ‘splitting’
because we split off the parts we don’t
want to acknowledge.
When we demonise people,
we split off the positive parts.
When we canonise people, we split off the negative.
A warning sign that we’ve demonised people is that
nothing they do, however positive, is good enough.
They can perform great acts
of charity and philanthropy.
We’ll find ways of dismissing them
as fake and self-serving.
Demonised people are ‘guilty until proven guilty’.
Conversely, a warning sign that we’ve canonised people
is that nothing they do,
however negative, is bad enough.
They can commit all kinds of slanders and attacks.
We’ll find ways of excusing every transgression.
Canonised people are ‘innocent until proven innocent’.
The solution to splitting is to recognise that
people aren’t all-good or all-bad but simply human
capable of the full range of human traits.
When I started seeing Muslims
as humans, instead of martyrs
I was able to admit all the reality I’d previously denied.
Khomeini and his followers were real Muslims.
The values of Parinda’s husband and family
did have something to do with Islam.
And Parinda was credible — and deserved support.
This leads to idea two: ideas are everything.
For many years, I deluded myself
that Religious Education at school
had given me a pretty rounded knowledge of Islam.
Those classes certainly taught me swathes of jargon.
Rakat, Zakat, Hajj, Eid al-Fitr, Eid al-Adha,
Muezzin, Qur’an, Hadith, Sira.
I wrote countless essays explaining these and other
terms, comparing them with elements in other religions
— comparing religious festivals, religious fasting
practices, religious buildings, and so on.
What was missing from those classes?
The actual ideas promoted by these religions.
The social values. The politics.
The foundational beliefs. The stuff that mattered.
These vacuous classes gave the impression
that religions were interchangeable;
that the underlying beliefs were basically the same.
— they just had different festivals, books and buildings.
But religions aren’t interchangeable.
They promote vastly different ideas,
shaping human lives in vastly differently ways.
Heavens Gate was a UFO religion
whose founder Marshall Applewhite taught his followers
to gradually disown their physical bodies
which were referred to as ‘vehicles’, making
them seem temporary and disposable.
Members were even encouraged to undergo
castration to eliminate their sexuality.
Eventually, we saw the results of this grooming.
Almost 20 years ago to the day
Applewhite persuaded the group to commit
mass suicide by ingesting phenobarbital
having told them their spirits would be picked up
by a spaceship trailing the Hale-Bopp comet
and transferred into a ‘Next level body’.
Now, imagine if Heaven’s Gate had succeeded
in becoming a major world religion,
gaining hundreds of millions of followers worldwide,
with huge groups of them intermittently committing
suicide every time a comet passed by the Earth.
Would you be happy for this religion
to be presented to your children
as no better or worse than all the other religions?
Would you be happy for them to learn its jargon
— like ‘vehicle’ and ‘Next level body’ — without any
critical discussion of its core ideas?
More to the point,would having
concerns about this religion
mean you were suffering from an irrational
fear called ‘Heaven’sGateophobia’?
When it comes to religion, ideas are everything.
If we don’t know the ideas, we don’t know the religion.
To gauge the ideas of a religion,
we need to see how it’s lived.
Simply reading the ideas in its holy scripture doesn’t necessarily do that.
Among those condemned to death
in
the Jewish torah are sabbath-breakers.
But we don’t see endless reports of modern Jews
killing people for working on the sabbath.
The Jewish judicial body that enforced these laws —known as the Sanhedrin —
was dissolved centuries ago.
If it was reestablished, things might look very different.
Unlike Judaism, Islam has a very active religious
judicial system called Sharia
which informs the official laws of several countries
and which some hope to see
implemented in other countries.
That gives Islam a unique political leverage
to impose its scriptural ideas on people.
And all the oppressive ideas conveyed
by Parinda and Oz have found support.
In 2016, Pakistan’s Council of Islamic Ideology
supported wife-beating for a range of offenses
including refusing sex without a religious excuse
not wearing a hijab, and talking to strangers.
This is based on Surah 4, verse 34 of the Qur’an
— a verse expressing ideas
that should’ve long ago died away
but are still widely perpetuated and defended.
Homosexuals are sentenced to death
in honour killings and official executions.
One Muslim cleric, speaking at a US University
in 2013, called it an act of compassion.
He later clarified this, explaining that
killing homosexuals was in their best interests
because they’d sin less.
And Oz was right about
Islam’s death penalty for leaving Islam
which is implemented in accordance with Sharia.
We sometime judge complex systems
like religions on woefully inadequate evidence.
If the only Muslims we knew
were peaceful, kind and liberated
we might use them as the
basis for our perception of Islam.
Conversely, if we read some of the violent, supremacist
passages contained within Islamic scripture
we might assume all Muslims support those ideas.
Getting to know a religion is about seeing
how its ideas shape the lives it touches.
This leads to idea three:
splitting breeds polarisation.
When we start loudly promoting an all-good
or all-bad image of any broad social group
we’ll often find other voices spring up
— loudly promoting the opposite view.
The all-bad group, unable to see the good,
is mystified by the all-good group’s obvious denial
and presses its own position harder.
But the all-good group, unable to see the bad, is equally
mystified by the all-bad group’s obvious denial
and does the same.
Focussing on each other’s denial, both groups push
each to greater extremes of polarisation.
The all-good group blocks progress
by denying all problems.
The all-bad group blocks progress by denying all hope.
To resolve the deadlock,
both groups need to recognise their own denial
— and acknowledge the problems and the hope.
Let me outline some of those problematic and hopeful areas.
There are Muslims who despise secularism
and Muslims who support it.
There are Muslims who reject criticism
and Muslims who welcome it.
There are Muslims who want to push the
whole world back to seventh century Islam
and Muslims who want to drag Islam
into the 21st century world.
There are Muslims who respond violently to cartoons
and Muslims who brush them off.
There are Muslims who try to deflect legitimate criticism of Islam
with double-talk
and Muslims who condemn this double-talk
and work to expose it.
We don’t have to respond to the voices we disagree with
by pretending they don’t exist
or pretending they’re not real Muslims.
We can just disagree with them —and support
the voices more aligned with our values.
Which leads to idea four: allow all voices.
It’s the essential spirit of the marketplace of ideas.
Allow all voices to be heard and
let the ideas they promote be scrutinised.
Let any deceptions and evasions be uncovered.
Let any oppressive agendas be exposed.
For this to happen, we need a level playing field. But for
centuries, one side has been systematically silenced.
For many non-Muslims, the Salman Rushdie
fatwa was the first indication
of the price paid by Muslims and ex-Muslims
who are perceived in any way to be critical of Islam.
Another indication came in 2004, when Ayaan Hirsi Ali and Theo van Gogh made a film called ‘Submission’
criticising the oppression of Muslim women.
Van Gogh was assassinated, with a death threat
to Hirsi Ali pinned to his body with a knife.
We see the same pattern in the emancipation
of so many oppressed groups.
The first critical voices are dealt with brutally
to discourage further resistance.
But the balance can shift when
enough voices emerge and spread the risk.
More critical Muslim and ex-Muslim voices
are slowly finding greater prominence
but still being subjected to attack.
Raheel Raza received death threats after leading
a mixed-gender congregation in prayer.
In what’s been described as a Rosa Parks-style
act of civil disobedience
Asra Nomani entered a West Virginia mosque
through the men’s door
and refused to move from
the men’s section during prayers.
Nomani and her parents
were subsequently threatened with death.
When former London imam Usama Hasan expressed
public support for the theory of evolution,
an online leaflet appeared and was later distributed
at the mosque, charging Hasan with disbelief
and quoting rulings of execution in similar cases.
Maajid Nawaz has made a habit of inviting his fellow
Muslims to join him in condemning punishments
like dismemberment for theft and
the stoning to death of adulterers.
Those he invites persistently decline to do so.
Opponents of Nawaz have incited
international assassination threats.
Death threats are the norm for Muslims
and ex-Muslims who dare to criticise Islam.
They take risks some would find unthinkable
to highlight real problems rooted in Islamic scripture
that are much more common
than some of us might like to imagine.
Some of their stories might be difficult and painful to listen to.
But the stories of future generations could be
a lot more painful if we don’t start listening.
Which leads to idea five: reassessing a cliche.
In a 2015 interview with CNN’s Fareed Zakaria,
Barack Obama said:
‘It’s very important for us to align ourselves
with the 99.9% of Muslims
who are looking for the same things
we are — order, peace, prosperity.’
When referring to peaceful Muslims, this figure
of 99.9% is so commonplace it’s become a cliché;
a reflex soundbite, uncritically accepted as truth.
Let’s look at this figure in relation to
two specific practices promoted within Islam:
the stoning to death of adulterers and the
execution of apostates.
Two questions.
First: What percentage of Muslims
do you think support these practices?
Second: At what percentage level would you
personally start having serious concerns?
Between 2010 and 2013, The Pew Research Centre polled 37 territories with significant Muslim populations
to gauge their opinions on these practices.
These 37 territories account for
60% of the total global population of Muslims.
Support for stoning adulterers ranged from
6% to 86%.
Support for killing apostates ranged from
1% to 88%.
Taking the average of these percentages alone
40% of Muslims wanted adulterers buried to their shoulders and pelted with rocks until they’re dead.
And 31% wanted people killed for leaving Islam.
Seeing this figure of 31% reminded me
of a BBC online report from the mid-2000s
also reporting 31% support for killing apostates
— this time among British Muslims.
Support in the 16-34 age range
was especially high at up to 37%.
More than one in three.
Clearly, a majority of Muslims
don’t support these barbaric practices.
But 99.9% is a daydream
from which we need to wake up.
And if younger generations are showing
greater support for these practices
that could to a growing problem, not a shrinking one.
Islam is not monolithic.
Reportedly, Muhammad predicted
there would be 73 sects of Islam.
In a claim not all Muslims accept, all but one
is said to be destined for hellfire.
The main divide is between the Sunni and Shia branches,
which favour different successors to Muhammad.
Both have given rise to subgroups
but while the Shia branch
recognises one school of Sharia
the Sunni branch recognises a handful of schools
favoured by different movements.
The Ahmadi branch proclaims:
‘Love for all Hatred for none’.
Ahmadi Muslims believe a messianic
reformer was born in the 1800s
sent ‘to end religious wars, condemn bloodshed
and reinstitute morality, justice and peace’.
The Ahmadi community has been denounced
as non-Muslim and aggressively persecuted.
In Pakistan, Ahmadi residents have reportedly
been required to disown their prophet
to obtain a Muslim passport
and hundreds from the community
have been murdered
in various mob attacks and full-scale massacres.
The campaign of persecution
has followed them to the UK
including death threats, the targeted
boycotting of Ahmadi businesses
and even protests to block permission for an
Ahmadi mosque — all by other Muslim groups.
Also worth a mention are the Sufis and the Quranists.
Quranists reject the Hadith,
taking the Qur’an as their sole text.
Reports of their persecution include
mass arrests in Sudan on charges of apostasy
where execution is threatened
for the wrong type of Islam.
The Sufis are a mystical Islamic order, emphasising
inner experience, ritual and worship.
Sufis have been accused
of idolatry and religious innovation
and their persecution has ranged from the banning
of devotional gatherings in Egypt
to the systematic destruction of
Sufi shrines in Timbuktu
to the murder of hundreds of Sufis in Pakistan.
It’s plain to see, just as no Christian
speaks for all Christians
no Muslim speaks for all Muslims.
It’s also tempting to fall into splitting again,
thinking of these groups as all good or all bad.
Again, the truth is more complex.
For example, while the Ahmadi community
proclaims ‘Love for all and hatred for none’
in its commentary on the Qur’an,
we find support for the idea that there can be
no true friendship between believers and disbelievers — an idea it claims has general application
as well as being specially true in times of war.
The ReasonOnFaith website has also contrasted
regressive Ahmadi views on homosexuality
with the more welcoming views of groups like
Muslims for Progressive Values.
But what’s abundantly clear in all this conflict
is that the people who suffer most
under Islam are Muslims.
If we care about that suffering, we need to
acknowledge the part Islam plays in it.
Ravi got in touch with me in 2013 to ask about
the meanings of certain phrases in my videos.
He said he was atheist and wanted
to translate them for some people.
I explained the phrases
and asked who he was sharing it with.
He explained that he and
a small group of trusted friends
lived in a state where the penalty
for apostasy was death
— each of them pretending to be a Muslim in public life
while privately leading a secular existence.
Ravi and his friends gathered
atheist materials from online sources
to discuss with each other and develop
their critical thinking skills.
He said these forbidden materials were like
candles, illuminating the darkness around them
and giving them hope that one day they
might step out into the light.
Ravi lives in constant fear of discovery.
And his fears are well-founded.
In 2006, under Sharia, Afghan citizen Abdul Rahman
was sentenced to death for converting to Christianity.
He was eventually granted asylum by Italy
after Afghan president Hamid Karzai became
caught between pressure from the West to release him
and pressure from the Afghan public to execute him.
Rahman’s trial judge commented:
‘The Prophet Muhammad has said several times
that those who convert from Islam should be
killed if they refuse to come back.’
He added: ‘Islam is a religion of peace,
tolerance, kindness and integrity.
That is why we have told him
if he regrets what he did, then we will forgive him.’
So, this is the measure of peace:
‘Think what we tell you to think and we won’t kill you.’
Meriam Ibrahim was eight months pregnant
when she was sentenced to death
for refusing to renounce Christianity.
She identified as a Christian,
following her mother’s religion.
But with her father being a Muslim,
she was expected to take up his faith
Thanks to an Amnesty International
petition that gained more than a million signatures,
the Sudanese authorities released her,
exiling her and her family to the US.
So. Are critics of Islam suffering from an
irrational fear called ‘Islamophobia’?
Or do they have a point?
Religious ideologies aren’t interchangeable.
They promote vastly different ideas,
shaping human lives in vastly differently ways.
What follows from that is that some religions will
attract more negative attention than others.
Ideologies that degrade and dehumanise people,
that promote violence and threaten death,
should expect more criticism than ideologies that don’t.
They’re not being ‘picked on’
for arbitrary, prejudicial reasons.
They’re being held to account for the abuse they inspire.
Religious ideas are not untouchable.
They deserve no privilege. On the contrary, they
deserve rigorous and long-overdue criticism
to catch up on centuries of silencing criticism
through shunning, imprisonment, censorship and killing.
I don’t measure an ideology’s peacefulness by
its willingness not to kill people
so long as they surrender to it.
The implicit threat behind that idea
destroys any pretence of peacefulness.
People come first.
And when ideas threaten people,
it only provides further support
for the essential human activity of attacking ideas.